MINDS IN FERMENT (FROM THE ANNALS OF A TOWN)

THE earth was like an oven. The afternoon sun blazed with such energy
that even the thermometer hanging in the excise officer’s room lost its
head: it ran up to 112.5 and stopped there, irresolute. The inhabitants
streamed with perspiration like overdriven horses, and were too lazy to
mop their faces.

Two of the inhabitants were walking along the market-place in front of
the closely shuttered houses. One was Potcheshihin, the local treasury
clerk, and the other was Optimov, the agent, for many years a
correspondent of the Son of the Fatherland newspaper. They walked in
silence, speechless from the heat. Optimov felt tempted to find fault
with the local authorities for the dust and disorder of the market-
place, but, aware of the peace-loving disposition and moderate views of
his companion, he said nothing.

In the middle of the market-place Potcheshihin suddenly halted and began
gazing into the sky.

“What are you looking at?”

“Those starlings that flew up. I wonder where they have settled. Clouds
and clouds of them. . . . If one were to go and take a shot at them, and
if one were to pick them up . . . and if . . . They have settled in the
Father Prebendary’s garden!”

“Oh no! They are not in the Father Prebendary’s, they are in the Father
Deacon’s. If you did have a shot at them from here you wouldn’t kill
anything. Fine shot won’t carry so far; it loses its force. And why
should you kill them, anyway? They’re birds destructive of the fruit,
that’s true; still, they’re fowls of the air, works of the Lord. The
starling sings, you know. . . . And what does it sing, pray? A song of
praise. . . . ‘All ye fowls of the air, praise ye the Lord.’ No. I do
believe they have settled in the Father Prebendary’s garden.”

Three old pilgrim women, wearing bark shoes and carrying wallets, passed
noiselessly by the speakers. Looking enquiringly at the gentlemen who
were for some unknown reason staring at the Father Prebendary’s house,
they slackened their pace, and when they were a few yards off stopped,
glanced at the friends once more, and then fell to gazing at the house
themselves.

“Yes, you were right; they have settled in the Father Prebendary’s,”
said Optimov. “His cherries are ripe now, so they have gone there to
peck them.”

From the garden gate emerged the Father Prebendary himself, accompanied
by the sexton. Seeing the attention directed upon his abode and
wondering what people were staring at, he stopped, and he, too, as well
as the sexton, began looking upwards to find out.

“The father is going to a service somewhere, I suppose,” said
Potcheshihin. “The Lord be his succour!”

Some workmen from Purov’s factory, who had been bathing in the river,
passed between the friends and the priest. Seeing the latter absorbed in
contemplation of the heavens and the pilgrim women, too, standing
motionless with their eyes turned upwards, they stood still and stared
in the same direction.

A small boy leading a blind beggar and a peasant, carrying a tub of
stinking fish to throw into the market-place, did the same.

“There must be something the matter, I should think,” said Potcheshihin,
“a fire or something. But there’s no sign of smoke anywhere. Hey!
Kuzma!” he shouted to the peasant, “what’s the matter?”

The peasant made some reply, but Potcheshihin and Optimov did not catch
it. Sleepy-looking shopmen made their appearance at the doors of all the
shops. Some plasterers at work on a warehouse near left their ladders
and joined the workmen.

The fireman, who was describing circles with his bare feet, on the
watch-tower, halted, and, after looking steadily at them for a few
minutes, came down. The watch-tower was left deserted. This seemed
suspicious.

“There must be a fire somewhere. Don’t shove me! You damned swine!”

“Where do you see the fire? What fire? Pass on, gentlemen! I ask you
civilly!”

“It must be a fire indoors!”

“Asks us civilly and keeps poking with his elbows. Keep your hands to
yourself! Though you are a head constable, you have no sort of right to
make free with your fists!”

“He’s trodden on my corn! Ah! I’ll crush you!”

“Crushed? Who’s crushed? Lads! a man’s been crushed!

“What’s the meaning of this crowd? What do you want?”

“A man’s been crushed, please your honour!”

“Where? Pass on! I ask you civilly! I ask you civilly, you blockheads!”

“You may shove a peasant, but you daren’t touch a gentleman! Hands off!”

“Did you ever know such people? There’s no doing anything with them by
fair words, the devils! Sidorov, run for Akim Danilitch! Look sharp!
It’ll be the worse for you, gentlemen! Akim Danilitch is coming, and
he’ll give it to you! You here, Parfen? A blind man, and at his age too!
Can’t see, but he must be like other people and won’t do what he’s told.
Smirnov, put his name down!”

“Yes, sir! And shall I write down the men from Purov’s? That man there
with the swollen cheek, he’s from Purov’s works.”

“Don’t put down the men from Purov’s. It’s Purov’s birthday to-morrow.”

The starlings rose in a black cloud from the Father Prebendary’s garden,
but Potcheshihin and Optimov did not notice them. They stood staring
into the air, wondering what could have attracted such a crowd, and what
it was looking at.

Akim Danilitch appeared. Still munching and wiping his lips, he cut his
way into the crowd, bellowing:

“Firemen, be ready! Disperse! Mr. Optimov, disperse, or it’ll be the
worse for you! Instead of writing all kinds of things about decent
people in the papers, you had better try to behave yourself more
conformably! No good ever comes of reading the papers!”

“Kindly refrain from reflections upon literature!” cried Optimov hotly.
“I am a literary man, and I will allow no one to make reflections upon
literature! though, as is the duty of a citizen, I respect you as a
father and benefactor!”

“Firemen, turn the hose on them!”

“There’s no water, please your honour!”

“Don’t answer me! Go and get some! Look sharp!”

“We’ve nothing to get it in, your honour. The major has taken the fire-
brigade horses to drive his aunt to the station.”

“Disperse! Stand back, damnation take you! Is that to your taste? Put
him down, the devil!”

“I’ve lost my pencil, please your honour!”

The crowd grew larger and larger. There is no telling what proportions
it might have reached if the new organ just arrived from Moscow had not
fortunately begun playing in the tavern close by. Hearing their
favourite tune, the crowd gasped and rushed off to the tavern. So nobody
ever knew why the crowd had assembled, and Potcheshihin and Optimov had
by now forgotten the existence of the starlings who were innocently
responsible for the proceedings.

An hour later the town was still and silent again, and only a solitary
figure was to be seen—the fireman pacing round and round on the watch-
tower.

The same evening Akim Danilitch sat in the grocer’s shop drinking
limonade gaseuse and brandy, and writing:

“In addition to the official report, I venture, your Excellency, to
append a few supplementary observations of my own. Father and
benefactor! In very truth, but for the prayers of your virtuous spouse
in her salubrious villa near our town, there’s no knowing what might not
have come to pass. What I have been through to-day I can find no words
to express. The efficiency of Krushensky and of the major of the fire
brigade are beyond all praise! I am proud of such devoted servants of
our country! As for me, I did all that a weak man could do, whose only
desire is the welfare of his neighbour; and sitting now in the bosom of
my family, with tears in my eyes I thank Him Who spared us bloodshed! In
absence of evidence, the guilty parties remain in custody, but I propose
to release them in a week or so. It was their ignorance that led them
astray!”
